DESIGN 
IN THE 
WORLD OF 
BUSINESS
The realities of the world impose severe constraints 
upon the design of products. Up to now I have described the ideal case, assuming that human-centered 
design principles could be followed in a vacuum; that 
is, without attention to the real world of competition, costs, and 
schedules. Conflicting requirements will come from different 
sources, all of which are legitimate, all of which need to be resolved. 
Compromises must be made by all involved.
Now it is time to examine the concerns outside of humancentered design that affect the development of products. I start 
with the impact of competitive forces that drive the introduction 
of extra features, often to excess: the cause of the disease dubbed 
“featuritis,” whose major symptom is “creeping featurism.” From 
there, I examine the drivers of change, starting with technological 
drivers. When new technologies emerge, there is a temptation to 
develop new products immediately. But the time for radically new 
products to become successful is measured in years, decades, or 
in some instances centuries. This causes me to examine the two 
forms of product innovation relevant to design: incremental (less 
glamorous, but most common) and radical (most glamorous, but 
rarely successful). 
I conclude with reflections about the history and future prospects 
of this book. The first edition of this book has had a long and fruitful life. Twenty-five years is an amazingly long time for a book centered around technology to have remained relevant. If this revised 
and expanded edition lasts an equally long time, that means fifty 
years of The Design of Everyday Things. In these next twenty-five 
years, what new developments will take place? What will be the 
role of technology in our lives, for the future of books, and what 
are the moral obligations of the design profession? And finally, for 
how long will the principles in this book remain relevant? It should 
be no surprise that I believe they will always be just as relevant as 
they were twenty-five years ago, just as relevant as they are today. 
Why? The reason is simple. The design of technology to fit human 
needs and capabilities is determined by the psychology of people. 
Yes, technologies may change, but people stay the same.
Competitive Forces
Today, manufacturers around the world compete with one another. 
The competitive pressures are severe. After all, there are only a 
few basic ways by which a manufacturer can compete: three of the 
most important being price, features, and quality—unfortunately 
often in that order of importance. Speed is important, lest some 
other company get ahead in the rush for market presence. These 
pressures make it difficult to follow the full, iterative process of 
continual product improvement. Even relatively stable home products, such as automobiles, kitchen appliances, television sets, and 
computers, face the multiple forces of a competitive market that 
encourage the introduction of changes without sufficient testing 
and refinement.
Here is a simple, real example. I am working with a new startup 
company, developing an innovative line of cooking equipment. 
The founders had some unique ideas, pushing the technology of 
cooking far ahead of anything available for homes. We did numerous field tests, built numerous prototypes, and engaged a worldclass industrial designer. We modified the original product concept 
several times, based on early feedback from potential users and
advice from industry experts. But just as we were about to commission the first production of a few hand-tooled working prototypes that could be shown to potential investors and customers (an 
expensive proposition for the small self-funded company), other 
companies started displaying similar concepts in the trade shows. 
What? Did they steal the ideas? No, it’s what is called the Zeitgeist, a German word meaning “spirit of the time.” In other words, 
the time was ripe, the ideas were “in the air.” The competition 
emerged even before we had delivered our first product. What is 
a small, startup company to do? It doesn’t have money to compete 
with the large companies. It has to modify its ideas to keep ahead 
of the competition and come up with a demonstration that excites 
potential customers and wows potential investors and, more importantly, potential distributors of the product. It is the distributors 
who are the real customers, not the people who eventually buy the 
product in stores and use it in their homes. The example illustrates 
the real business pressures on companies: the need for speed, the 
concern about costs, the competition that may force the company 
to change its offerings, and the need to satisfy several classes of 
customers—investors, distributors, and, of course, the people who 
will actually use the product. Where should the company focus its 
limited resources? More user studies? Faster development? New, 
unique features?
The same pressures that the startup faced also impact established 
companies. But they have other pressures as well. Most products 
have a development cycle of one to two years. In order to bring out 
a new model every year, the design process for the new model has 
to have started even before the previous model has been released 
to customers. Moreover, mechanisms for collecting and feeding 
back the experiences of customers seldom exist. In an earlier era, 
there was close coupling between designers and users. Today, they 
are separated by barriers. Some companies prohibit designers from 
working with customers, a bizarre and senseless restriction. Why 
would they do this? In part to prevent leaks of the new developments to the competition, but also in part because customers may
stop purchasing the current offerings if they are led to believe that 
a new, more advanced item is soon to come. But even where there 
are no such restrictions, the complexity of large organizations coupled with the relentless pressure to finish the product makes this 
interaction difficult. Remember Norman’s Law of Chapter 6: The 
day a product development process starts, it is behind schedule 
and above budget.
FEATURITIS: A DEADLY TEMPTATION
In every successful product there lurks the carrier of an insidious 
disease called “featuritis,” with its main symptom being “creeping featurism.” The disease seems to have been first identified and 
named in 1976, but its origins probably go back to the earliest technologies, buried far back in the eons prior to the dawn of history. 
It seems unavoidable, with no known prevention. Let me explain.
Suppose we follow all the principles in this book for a wonderful, human-centered product. It obeys all design principles. It overcomes people’s problems and fulfills some important needs. It is 
attractive and easy to use and understand. As a result, suppose the 
product is successful: many people buy it and tell their friends to 
buy it. What could be wrong with this?
The problem is that after the product has been available for a 
while, a number of factors inevitably appear, pushing the company 
toward the addition of new features—toward creeping featurism. 
These factors include:
• Existing customers like the product, but express a wish for more features, more functions, more capability.
• A competing company adds new features to its products, producing 
competitive pressures to match that offering, but to do even more in 
order to get ahead of the competition.
• Customers are satisfied, but sales are declining because the market 
is saturated: everyone who wants the product already has it. Time to 
add wonderful enhancements that will cause people to want the new 
model, to upgrade.
Featuritis is highly infectious. New products are invariably more 
complex, more powerful, and different in size than the first release 
of a product. You can see that tension playing out in music players, 
mobile phones, and computers, especially on smart phones, tablets, and pads. Portable devices get smaller and smaller with each 
release, despite the addition of more and more features (making 
them ever more difficult to operate). Some products, such as automobiles, home refrigerators, television sets, and kitchen stoves, 
also increase in complexity with each release, getting larger and 
more powerful.
But whether the products get larger or smaller, each new edition 
invariably has more features than the previous one. Featuritis is 
an insidious disease, difficult to eradicate, impossible to vaccinate 
against. It is easy for marketing pressures to insist upon the addition 
of new features, but there is no call—or for that matter, budget—to 
get rid of old, unneeded ones.
How do you know when you have encountered featuritis? By 
its major symptom: creeping featurism. Want an example? Look 
at Figure 71, which illustrates the changes that have overcome the 
simple Lego motorcycle since my first encounter with it for the first 
edition of this book. The original motorcycle (Figure 41 and Figure 
7.1A) had only fifteen components and could be put together without any instructions: it had sufficient constraints that every piece 
had a unique location and orientation. But now, as Figure 71B 
shows, the same motorcycle has become bloated, with twenty-nine 
pieces. I needed instructions.
Creeping featurism is the tendency to add to the number of features of a product, often extending the number beyond all reason. 
There is no way that a product can remain usable and understandable by the time it has all of those special-purpose features that 
have been added in over time.
In her book Different, Harvard professor Youngme Moon argues that it is this attempt to match the competition that causes all 
products to be the same. When companies try to increase sales by 
matching every feature of their competitors, they end up hurting 
themselves. After all, when products from two companies match 
feature by feature, there is no longer any reason for a customer to 
prefer one over another. This is competition-driven design. Unfortunately, the mind-set of matching the competitor’s list of features 
pervades many organizations. Even if the first versions of a product are well done, human-centered, and focused upon real needs, 
it is the rare organization that is content to let a good product stay 
untouched.
Most companies compare features with their competition to determine where they are weak, so they can strengthen those areas. 
Wrong, argues Moon. A better strategy is to concentrate on areas 
where they are stronger and to strengthen them even more. Then 
focus all marketing and advertisements to point out the strong 
points. This causes the product to stand out from the mindless 
herd. As for the weaknesses, ignore the irrelevant ones, says Moon. 
The lesson is simple: don’t follow blindly; focus on strengths, not 
weaknesses. If the product has real strengths, it can afford to just 
be “good enough” in the other areas.
FIGURE 71 Featuritis Strikes Lego. Figure A shows the original Lego Motorcycle 
available in 1988 when I used it in the first edition of this book (on the left), next to the 
2013 version (on the right). The old version had only fifteen pieces. No manual was 
needed to put it together. For the new version, the box proudly proclaims “29 pieces.” 
I could put the original version together without instructions. Figure B shows how far 
I got with the new version before I gave up and had to consult the instruction sheet. 
Why did Lego believe it had to change the motorcycle? Perhaps because featuritis 
struck real police motorcycles, causing them to increase in size and complexity and 
Lego felt that its toy needed to match the world. (Photographs by the author.)
Good design requires stepping back from competitive pressures 
and ensuring that the entire product be consistent, coherent, and 
understandable. This stance requires the leadership of the company to withstand the marketing forces that keep begging to add 
this feature or that, each thought to be essential for some market 
segment. The best products come from ignoring these competing 
voices and instead focusing on the true needs of the people who 
use the product.
Jeff Bezos, the founder and CEO of Amazon.com, calls his approach “customer obsessed.” Everything is focused upon the requirements of Amazon’s customers. The competition is ignored, 
the traditional marketing requirements are ignored. The focus is on 
simple, customer-driven questions: what do the customers want; 
how can their needs best be satisfied; what can be done better to 
enhance customer service and customer value? Focus on the customer, Bezos argues, and the rest takes care of itself. Many companies claim to aspire to this philosophy, but few are able to follow 
it. Usually it is only possible where the head of the company, the 
CEO, is also the founder. Once the company passes control to others, especially those who follow the traditional MBA dictum of 
putting profit above customer concerns, the story goes downhill. 
Profits may indeed increase in the short term, but eventually the 
product quality deteriorates to the point where customers desert. 
Quality only comes about by continual focus on, and attention to, 
the people who matter: customers.
New Technologies Force Change 
Today, we have new requirements. We now need to type on small, 
portable devices that don’t have room for a full keyboard. Touchand gesture-sensitive screens allow a new form of typing. We can 
bypass typing altogether through handwriting recognition and 
speech understanding.
Consider the four products shown in Figure 7.2. Their appearance and methods of operations changed radically in their century 
of existence. Early telephones, such as the one in Figure 72A, did 
not have keyboards: a human operator intervened to make the connections. Even when operators were first replaced by automatic 
switching systems, the “keyboard” was a rotary dial with ten holes, 
one for each digit. When the dial was replaced with pushbutton 
keys, it suffered a slight case of featuritis: the ten positions of the 
dial were replaced with twelve keys: the ten digits plus * and #.
But much more interesting is the merger of devices. The human 
computer gave rise to laptops, small portable computers. The telephone moved to small, portable cellular phones (called mobiles 
in much of the world). Smart phones had large, touch-sensitive 
screens, operated by gesture. Soon computers merged into tablets, as did cell phones. Cameras merged with cell phones. Today, 
talking, video conferences, writing, photography (both still and 
video), and collaborative interaction of all sorts are increasingly 
being done by one single device, available with a large variety of 
screen sizes, computational power, and portability. It doesn’t make 
sense to call them computers, phones, or cameras: we need a new 
name. Let’s call them “smart screens.” In the twenty-second century, will we still have phones? I predict that although we will still 
talk with one another over a distance, we will not have any device 
called a telephone.
FIGURE 72 100 Years of Telephones and Keyboards. Figures A and B show the 
change in the telephone from the Western Electric crank telephone of the 1910s, where 
rotating the crank on the right generated a signal alerting the operator, to the phone of 
the 2010s. They seem to have nothing in common. Figures C and D contrast a keyboard 
of the 1910s with one from the 2010s. The keyboards are still laid out in the same way, 
but the first requires physical depression of each key; the second, a quick tracing of a 
finger over the relevant letters (the image shows the word many being entered). Credits: A, B, and C: photographs by the author; objects in A and C courtesy of the Museum 
of American Heritage, Palo Alto, California. D shows the “Swype” keyboard from 
Nuance. Image being used courtesy of Nuance Communications, Inc.
As the pressures for larger screens forced the demise of physical keyboards (despite the attempt to make tiny keyboards, operated with single fingers or thumbs), the keyboards were displayed 
on the screen whenever needed, each letter tapped one at a time. 
This is slow, even when the system tries to predict the word being 
typed so that keying can stop as soon as the correct word shows 
up. Several systems were soon developed that allowed the finger or 
stylus to trace a path among the letters of the word: word-gesture 
systems. The gestures were sufficiently different from one another 
that it wasn’t even necessary to touch all the letters—it only mattered that the pattern generated by the approximation to the correct path was close enough to the desired one. This turns out to be 
a fast and easy way to type (Figure 72D).
With gesture-based systems, a major rethinking is possible. Why 
keep the letters in the same QWERTY arrangement? The pattern 
generation would be even faster if letters were rearranged to maximize speed when using a single finger or stylus to trace out the 
letters. Good idea, but when one of the pioneers in developing this 
technique, Shumin Zhai, then at IBM, tried it, he ran into the legacy 
problem. People knew QWERTY and balked at having to learn a 
different organization. Today, the word-gesture method of typing 
is widely used, but with QWERTY keyboards (as in Figure 7.2D).
Technology changes the way we do things, but fundamental 
needs remain unchanged. The need for getting thoughts written 
down, for telling stories, doing critical reviews, or writing fiction 
and nonfiction will remain. Some will be written using traditional 
keyboards, even on new technological devices, because the keyboard still remains the fastest way to enter words into a system, 
whether it be paper or electronic, physical or virtual. Some people 
will prefer to speak their ideas, dictating them. But spoken words 
are still likely to be turned into printed words (even if the print 
is simply on a display device), because reading is far faster and 
superior to listening. Reading can be done quickly: it is possible to 
read around three hundred words per minute and to skim, jumping ahead and back, effectively acquiring information at rates in 
the thousands of words per minute. Listening is slow and serial, 
usually at around sixty words per minute, and although this rate 
can be doubled or tripled with speech compression technologies 
and training, it is still slower than reading and not easy to skim. 
But the new media and new technologies will supplement the old, 
so that writing will no longer dominate as much as it did in the 
past, when it was the only medium widely available. Now that 
anyone can type and dictate, take photographs and videos, draw 
animated scenes, and creatively produce experiences that in the 
twentieth century required huge amounts of technology and large 
crews of specialized workers, the types of devices that allow us to 
do these tasks and the ways they are controlled will proliferate.
The role of writing in civilization has changed over its five thousand years of existence. Today, writing has become increasingly 
common, although increasingly as short, informal messages. We 
now communicate using a wide variety of media: voice, video, 
handwriting, and typing, sometimes with all ten fingers, sometimes just with the thumbs, and sometimes by gestures. Over time, 
the ways by which we interact and communicate change with technology. But because the fundamental psychology of human beings 
will remain unchanged, the design rules in this book will still apply.
Of course, it isn’t just communication and writing that has 
changed. Technological change has impacted every sphere of our 
lives, from the way education is conducted, to medicine, foods, 
clothing, and transportation. We now can manufacture things at 
home, using 3-D printers. We can play games with partners around 
the world. Cars are capable of driving themselves, and their engines have changed from internal combustion to an assortment of 
pure electric and hybrids. Name an industry or an activity and if 
it hasn’t already been transformed by new technologies, it will be.
Technology is a powerful driver for change. Sometimes for the 
better, sometimes for the worse. Sometimes to fulfill important 
needs, and sometimes simply because the technology makes the 
change possible.